The gap between those who are technologically proficient
and those who aren't will never be more apparent than
at this point in time.
But what does our technological future hold
for all of us?
We spoke with Ian Wegge, a futurist who assists corporations
to assess what kinds of changes they need to prepare for
to keep pace with the rapid changes in technology.
From retail industries to the way we interface
with our automobiles, Ian has a fascinating take
on what our futures may look like.
You are known as a futurist.
You refer to yourself as a futurist.
Why don't we begin where we are right now,
which is the world seems to be spinning out of control,
the rate of change in technology
is absolutely mind-boggling.
Tell us where we are.
Well, if we know one thing,
we know that the rate
of change is increasing every single day,
and that lifestyles of my children are
very different to mine.
I think the lifestyles of their children will change
many times throughout the course of their lifetime.
Of course, today we already know
that if a technology works, it's probably obsolete.
Somebody's already working on the next phase,
the next best thing.
When we look at the different technologies
that we brought into our lives,
we can start to determine what the impacts
of those are likely to be.
And over the next 20, 50, 100 years,
I think the way in which we live our lives
will be dramatically different to the way it was
as we grew up.
Not only that, we have a number of areas
that we're going to need to look at
in terms of being successful.
If we're an individual, we have to accept
that we may need to have different careers.
There are some careers that I think
we'll always need and others we may have
to recognize that will only be good for us
for the period of time in which
that technology is readily useable.
As it becomes obsolete, we'll have to be prepared
to retrain and move on.
So what happens to people who,
at this point in history, say are over the age of 35
and they've gone to college.
They've put in their eight years,
have their graduate degrees
and are pretty much entrenched in a certain industry.
It appears this industry is going to change.
Give us some examples of ways in which
this is already happening.
Of course, this extends to people
above the age of 35, who might be less flexible,
especially as we approach 50 and over.
OK, well, I think that if you're a doctor,
you're safe.
We know that we're going
to need health care for a long time.
I think the age of the accountant will be
with us for some time as people manage their money,
but I think we'll automate a number of the functions
that we currently use an accountant for.
We will embed our accounting and our taxation
in our everyday lives through the use of a PDA.
All our transactions will become noted.
There are other industries that we can already see
might be declining.
We can see that our service industries are going abroad.
Our manufacturing is going abroad.
That's not to say we don't need the engineers
that are expert in manufacturing,
but we may not need them in a specific location.
Today we have the scenarios of a huge amount
of what we call "outsourcing" to India in the IT world,
yet we still think we'll be short of those IT resources.
It's still a good skill to have.
But there are other skill sets which will become redundant.
We've seen this with whole industries and companies.
The photocopying industry outdid the carbon sheets
that we used to buy because we wanted
to receive copies of things.
Kodak have reinvented themselves,
but unfortunately unsuccessfully,
as a digital camera company.
And whole industries have gone by the wayside.
I think if you look over the last 30 years
at the Fortune 500, you'll find
that almost half those companies have disappeared.
And that rate of change will probably accelerate.
You have to be quick to market today
in order to gain traction, in order to gain profitability.
If you're second, there may be a place for you.
If you're third and fourth, it's very difficult
to be a niche player.
And I'm worried.
I'm very concerned that, today,
we have a large number of technologies
that not only are replacing existing industries,
but they're consolidating industries
into one piece of equipment.
And that piece of equipment is the PDA
or the cell phone.
Whereas it was a communications device,
we're now embedding so much more technology
into that device.
If we take the reason for that,
it's quite simply that we've had the digital age.
The ability to reduce into bits and bytes,
everything we write, everything we say,
everything we film,
everything we photograph
is now digitally enabled through bits and bytes.
We've been able to compress into an ever smaller chip
using the Moore's Law principle,
that the processing power will double every year or so,
we've been able to consolidate bits and bytes
to represent video, pictures, text.
That's given us the ability to store and archive
virtually all of the information that we've ever had
in the world, but also to invent new technologies
using the technology.
E.g., geographic positioning systems are now embedded
in your cell phone.
We use it as a diary.
We use it as the personal digital assistant.
A lot of the things that we see on a PC
are now within that PDA.
As we increase the power of that chip,
we'll be able to play video.
We'll be able. maybe, to get video on-demand,
downloaded while asleep from a remote point.
We can use it as a radio,
a voice recorder.
We'll use it as our MP3 player for music.
We will find other ways to use them,
perhaps we haven't even thought of yet.
But all of those periphery devices
that we have squeezed into one device
will create an alarming change in the economy,
because all the people that were employed
in those whole industries are now faced
with the prospect of having to retrain
to do something else.
We know that if you were a CD manufacturer,
you're gonna be replaced by MP3 technology.
If you were processing photographs,
you're probably going to be replaced
by a digital camera and a photographic printer.
All of those technologies, being embedded
into a single device will have the effect
of creating maybe even a recession in the economy,
as we don't have enough consumer demand
for those periphery devices.
As I grew up and started my first home,
I needed a record player.
That became a CD player.
I may have chosen to have a fax machine
and a phone and then, later, an Internet connection.
Lastly, I may have bought a projector
to project my 35 millimeter slides
onto a screen.
I would have bought a screen.
There are a whole number of things
that we would have put in our houses
that our children will grow up
and probably not need to purchase.
Because a single device will have replaced all
of those technologies.
I think that if you're employed as somebody
in those technologies, or developing those technologies
as products, we have to be careful.
Because it's likely that we are going to be forced out
of the market and become a niche player.
There will always be room for an up-market hi-fi,
but there may not always be room for mass-market
of people who need a CD Walkman
when they're embedding it within their cell phone
or their personal digital assistant.
Let's talk about a situation
that has actually gone the opposite direction,
an industry that has been revived as a result
of technology.
We're looking at the shipping industry
as a result of the increase in online marketing.
Eight years ago, when the Internet was becoming pervasive,
and we all understood that E-commerce
and the ability to buy products online was going
to mean that we were going to be shipping
a large number of goods from A to B.
Then we had the Ebay revolution,
where individuals became their own retailer
and were selling things to whoever was interested worldwide
in purchasing them.
You didn't need to be a rocket scientist
at that stage to realize that there was going
to be a lot more items being shipped from A to B.
The traditional postal services did not have a monopoly
on that business and were rather more expensive
often than the courier firms were.
If we take DHL, we look at FedEx.
We look at UPS.
They've all done exceptionally well.
They've grown their businesses.
In terms of net worth to their shareholders,
they've all doubled in value in the last five years.
So, there have been industries that were traditional
that have benefited from this revolution,
just as there have been some industries
that have obviously declined as a result
of the digital revolution and E-commerce.
Today the retail industry will suffer
by the fact that the expertise
that we used to go to
is now available to us, still, at the retail store,
but we can also look it up online
and find out what was the best product
and then find the best price.
It's moving us into a perfect market situation,
where we know all the people that manufacture,
and we can research in our own homes
all of the prices with this technology.
Which makes it difficult for a retailer,
with their increased overheads, to survive.
Of course, we're going through that transition
where some of use are familiar with the technology.
Some of us--
My parents, for instance, are still very much
against the use of that technology
and like the personal touch.
We are growing a generation of children
who are very comfortable with purchasing online
and researching online.
So, for example, the savvy companies--
Let's use an example, say, of Pottery Barn
in the United States.
Pottery Barn still has their retail outlets.
You can go and touch and feel.
It's nicely done.
But at the same time, they'll send you
a beautiful, glossy catalog each month.
Then they'll send you their online newsletters and alerts.
How has a profile like that changed
within the structure of their company?
Does that mean they close down more stores, naturally?
Or are they at the leading edge of that wave?
I think they've managed their transition very well.
There are retail outlets
where you still need a retail presence.
I don't think people are about to buy their clothes
without trying them on.
Although, a number of companies grew up,
and were quite successful selling off the peg
to predefined sizes.
Some of them got very clever.
We had the situation where LandsEnd.com
would allow you to put in your vital statistics.
And then show you models who had the same shape as you,
what they looked like in their clothes.
We had another company called, Eyeglasses.com.
I used to wear glasses, then I had Lasik surgery.
They would enable you to upload a picture
of yourself.
Then they would let you put on glasses
onto your face.
What they did is,
they just made the glasses opaque
so that you would see the frame of the glasses.
You would show them where your eyes were.
They would then put different pairs of glasses on you.
Then they would match your prescription.
They did moderately well.
They didn't change the face of optometry overnight,
but it was a very interesting way to choose your glasses
once you knew what your prescription was.
Of course, sunglasses could be bought in the same way.
The reality, though, for the casual wearer
of glasses now, is we've also gone into mass production,
so that if you know your prescription is plus one,
or minus two, you can buy them off the shelf
in shops like Hallmark.
So, we have commoditized what used
to be a specfic industry.
Just as we did with stockbrokers.
We used to charge--
What was it?
Half a percent, one percent?
For a transaction that we're now carrying out
on the Internet for four dollars.
I think that's the cheapest I've seen it.
A whole slew of people that could be employed
in that industry have really been broadsided
by technology.
We don't need the personal touch
to make a transaction, to buy and sell shares today.
I think that in terms of the way that the SEC goes,
I think there is an inevitability that more technology
is going to be implemented to make sure
that we all get the same view of the data
and level the playing field for the broker
versus the individual in the not too distant future.
So, what does this do the face
of the solo business owner?
We already know what's happening
in the case of Walmart
and small hardware stores, et cetera.
I mean, that's a classic example
of the mom and pop closing down.
How, in this culture that we are going
to be seeing in the future and that is already present
to an extent, will the individual business owner
even fit in?
The mom and pop who has a nice little dress shop,
for example.
Will there still be a place for this?
I think in personal apparel, I think they have a place.
But I do think that it will be very difficult
to sell commodity products profitably in the high street.
Quite simply, once the consumer regards your product
as a commodity, you have nowhere to go.
You can only compete on price.
Whenever there's a service element,
a service delivery element embedded,
there is a place for the retailer.
In the hospitality industry, for some time,
everybody predicted the doom of the travel agent.
Let's not be defensive.
There has been an enormous shake-out
of travel agencies who just simply took the booking.
There are also some incredibly successful travel agencies
that embraced the technology
and will still advise their clients
on what sort of holiday they want,
because they know the marketplace.
People will always pay a premium
for that personal knowledge.
But, be it a commodity?
No, I wouldn't open a retail store today
and sell commodities.
Let's talk about another industry.
Now, we're going a little bit further into the future
in terms of the technology of the automotive industry,
and, perhaps also that of flight.
And its interface with the industries that support it,
such as insurance.
Let's talk about what that looks like in the future.
Well, technology's bearing down on the insurance market.
I'm not sure they're quite fully aware of it yet.
The automotive industry has advanced using technology
to make our journeys safer.
On one level you could say
that few of us get lost.
A lot of accidents happen when we get lost.
With MapQuest, Yahoo Maps
and in-car navigation systems,
we're not going to get lost as much.
If we're not lost, we know the roads we're on.
We're not looking around for road signs.
We're going to have less accidents.
We've already got the technology that was released
at the Las Vegas technology show this year,
which is tracking our eye movements.
It's going to beep at us if we are not looking
at the road ahead.
It could even beep at you if you haven't looked
in your rear view mirror for 10 seconds.
It can even beep at you if you've put your indicator on
before you've looked in both wing mirrors.
It's going to beep at you.
It's going to teach you to drive properly,
if you choose to take the cue from it
that says, "There's an alarm here.
"I haven't looked where I should be looking."
Most accidents are caused by driver distraction.
So if you keep people focused on the road,
hopefully it will reduce the number of accidents.
So, is this technology--
Let me just go back for a second.
The technology you were speaking about,
that you saw at the show in Las Vegas.
Is that something that is going to be standard
in autos in the future?
Or is this optional?
How does this--
I don't think we'll see it arrive in cars
in two or three years.
But it is one of those added benefits
in the elite, luxury car market
that people might pay a bit more for.
What we normally see is the introductions
of technology and safety mechanisms,
like ABS brakes.
They came into the luxury market first,
then they worked their way back to being standard.
That will be, I believe, the modus operandi
for all these new technologies.
But in the end, they will make us safer.
Airbags, for instance, were not standard
and now they are.
Now we're talking about side-impact airbags.
We're talking about--
OK, if we are in an accident, how do we make it safer?
How do we build a car that doesn't damage the pedestrian
if we're involved in an accident with a pedestrian.
But we also have the radar technology
that, basically, is saying, "Are we too close,
"for the speed that we're doing,
"to the car in front?"
If we are, again, either an alarm can sound,
or maybe we configure the car and say,
you cannot get too close for the speed
you are doing, for the road conditions
to the car in front.
All of these should reduce the number
of accidents we see on the roads
and make car driving a safer entity.
When my children drive,
I will take every single item
of technology I can to make it safe.
I think a 16 year-old driving a car in America
is highly likely to have an accident.
That's what the insurance statistics say,
and that's why you're charged so much.
But if we could make an environment,
even with more cars on the road,
that is safer, we should have less accidents.
We shouldn't have as many insurance claims,
which should mean that our premiums go down.
Whether that will mean
that one day insurance companies will consolidate
remains to be seen.
But they will not have to function
in the way they function today.
I'm sure as we embed the technology
in the car, the insurance industry should catch up
with us and say, OK, if we're using the technology
insurance will be cheaper.
Let's take it out even further
into the future where the technology
in automotives is getting to the point
where you don't need to have a driver.
Well, of course we've seen this,
first of all, with military applications.
A lot of technology is invented by the military.
In the military world today, we're already seeing drones
operating in Afghanistan and Iraq.
These are pilot-less aircraft.
We know that we can fly any aircraft today
that has autopilot.
But as individuals we feel a little more comfortable
if we've got people driving our planes.
Maybe that will change over time.
Cars today can do a certain amount of driving themselves.
We know that trains drive themselves.
If you go to Dallas-Fort Worth airport,
you will get on a pilot-less tram,
and you're quite happy traveling
between the terminals.
We know that the technology is here today
to allow us to get into a vehicle
and it will drive us from A to B.
It's a combination of the geographic positioning systems,
the ability to embed wires in the road
and the ability to know what is around the car
at any time.
If I was to go on holiday with my family
from Phoenix, and I knew that I could get
into my car and go to sleep at 10 o'clock at night
and wake up in San Diego at six am,
and not have touched the steering wheel,
I would actually think that was a pretty good deal
for a weekend away.
It think there are people ready to use that technology.
I think the worry is when we mix the technologies
of people who don't have it
versus people that do, there's still the capacity
for humans to do something unexpected.
You may not be able to write the computer program
that's going to deal with every occurrence.
But the idea that our cars will drive themselves
has more impact for the automotive industry.
It's a quantum leap for the insurer
because we shouldn't be having accidents.
So, do you need insurance if you're using that technology?
Additionally, the car manufacturer has to build a car
that, maybe, doesn't have a steering wheel.
It becomes a pod.
They become, potentially, very generic devices.
There are two trends that I see at the moment
which are both very interesting.
One of which is, people offering a car rental service.
They're doing this by having cars available
in specific locations on a membership basis
in some of the busy cities.
This is a company called Zipcar.
It think the jury's still out, ultimately
as to whether it'll be successful.
But it's targeting the young, upwardly mobile professional,
probably renting a flat in a district of a city
where parking is exceptionally difficult.
They may only need a car on a weekend
or maybe to go once a week to an evening class.
Every other day they're getting on the train,
the underground, the bus to go to work
and travel back.
If parking your car is a problem,
then being able to have access to a car
that you aren't parking and you aren't servicing
and you aren't paying insurance on,
three times a week is a beautiful idea.
Of course, they've consolidated on only one vehicle.
It's the Ford Focus.
It's embedded with a GPS chip.
So, essentially, they know where all
of these cars are at any time.
They service them at night.
They fill them up with gas overnight.
You book online.
It tells you where you'll pick-up your car from.
You'll be able to see whether it's there.
You travel.
You get a key fob, which has an RF device.
You dab it on the wind screen.
It knows it's you.
It will open the doors for you.
It will then allow you to drive that car
to wherever you wanted to go.
You book it for a set amount of time.
There are penalties if you don't return it
to where it's supposed to be.
If you're involved in an accident,
well, it knows.
It has these sort of OnStar capabilities.
They will come and deal with it.
But the beauty of this is
we're sharing the vehicle.
Keep that in your head for awhile.
If we have driver-less cars,
and we're prepared to share vehicles,
and we create a network of roads
that maybe move far quicker than we do today,
if technology allows us to build super-light vehicles
that will travel very fast in safety,
maybe we'll choose not to own our own cars,
but to call up a device, a pod if you like,
that will take us from A to B at anytime.
As long as there are enough of them available to us,
we may choose not to own our own car
because, financially that becomes very wasteful.
I mean, building a car uses a lot of materials.
If we could share them,
it would change our way of life.
I think there's a lot of barriers that we have to overcome
before the mainstream is prepared to get rid of their car.
However, I think the day could come
when the advantages to us, of sharing those vehicles,
as long as they're always available to us,
would be there.
You wouldn't need a garage.
You wouldn't need to park it.
You don't need to service it.
You don't need to insure it.
You do not need to fill it with gas.
And it gets you from A to B quickly and safely.
Of course, that changes other industries.
The pizza delivery boy.
The pizza arrives in a pod.
We don't need a whole car.
Maybe we have mini-pods that use the same circuitry
or the same infrastructure that will deliver goods
and services around in, not real time,
but as fast as we can make them work.
I mean, some people have said we might build a city
with an underground infrastructure
of these fast-moving electromagnetic pods
that can deliver goods and services
around the city very quickly.
So, you don't need a fridge anymore.
If you need to cook, you will call-up your ingredients
and they'll be there in five minutes.
I think we're well into the future here.
But the idea of first moving to cars
that drive themselves,
and secondly, maybe sharing a device
or a pod that will take us from A to B
are certainly there.
If it's a true network, those pods may join together
so that you're not using as much energy
for people who are going to the same place.
Ultimately, maybe, you get into a pod
to go to the airport and you can surround yourself
in your pod with everything you need.
You travel with your luggage.
You go on a plane.
You travel to a remote destination.
You arrive and it's a painless experience,
surrounded by the entertainment that you choose.
That leads to another interesting story
that I'd like to tell you.
I attended an innovation workshop
where the tutor came up to us and said,
"I've got an idea.
"Air travel, people don't like it.
"They don't like the fact that, generally speaking,
"it can be bumpy.
"You're cramped into a small space
"for a long period of time,
"sharing everybody elses' germs
"and it's an unpleasant experience.
"Herded around like cattle.
"What if I picked you up from your home
"and I gave you an injection?
"I put you in a little pod and at the bottom
"of the pod was your luggage.
"You go to sleep in a air conditioned environment.
"We then take you to the airport.
"We stack you ten deep on a plane,
"all fully air conditioned.
"Your heart is monitored.
"I will fly you to where you're going.
"At the other end I could wake you up
"with an injection."
Doesn't sound warm and fuzzy
to begin with, but I can see where you're headed.
(laughs)
We all looked at him in astonishment.
I said, "There is no way I'm getting on a plane like that."
I want to be around if anything happens.
It was fun because it's actually very easy to defend that.
No terrorism because nobody's alive--
Well, hopefully, we're alive.
Nobody's conscious. (laughs)
Nobody's conscious enough to do any damage.
There are a lot of safety things
that we could keep from happening.
Deep vein thrombosis.
You're a lot better lying down than you are sitting
on a plane for long periods of time.
And you always arrive refreshed.
On the other hand, we're just not ready for it.
There's a slow rate of change of technology
that people will accept.
Maybe the biggest barrier
to us accepting technology advances is us.
It's the rate at which
we can effectively use that technology.
Where are you seeing some
of the chaos at this period in history.
Because this is a major issue.
Technology is changing so quickly
and industries are starting to dry up
as others are being given birth to.
How do you notice, when you're advising a company?
How do you see us beginning
to strategically adapt to all of this?
We have to be aware of our complete surroundings.
As a company, you need to look at not only
who your customers are and where they are headed,
but you also need to look back and say,
"Who's supplying me?"
Because they may go out of business.
Because there are economic loads.
There is an economic factor that you have
to achieve to manufacture certain goods and services.
If you're using a portion of somebody's output
but the rest of it is made redundant
because their customer doesn't actually need
that product anymore, you have to be aware
that your supply chain can change drastically.
So you have to be up to speed on what's happening
both looking behind you at your suppliers
as well as looking forwards into the market
at how the consumer or customer is going to behave.
I think that the advent of the PDA
that we were describing earlier needs
to be looked at more closely.
That device can be your office away from home.
It can be your office anywhere.
If we are wirelessly connected to our data,
whether that be Word files, Excel files,
video, music as we were talking about earlier,
if I have access to that anywhere,
I can be online and effectively productive anywhere
in the world.
My friends all carry the Blackberry today.
Wirelessly connected to the Internet,
they get Email 24 hours a day.
They can use it wherever they are
in the world that gets a wireless signal.
That increases the megahertz or the frequency
with which we're able to operate the economy.
Gone are the days where we'd send a letter
asking for a quote.
It would come back.
The speed that the economy works at today
with Email, we can make informed decisions
very, very quickly.
We have to be aware
that not only can we make informed decisions quickly,
our customers make informed decisions.
If we're not the leading player in a market,
and we don't have a price differential
to cope with the fact that we don't have the best product,
it's highly likely that we'll find it very difficult
to survive.
Anticipating what the market will want
is key to your future success.
But just as we were saying
that those individual technologies
that we surround ourselves may be made redundant
as we consolidate them into one device.
That device fulfills a very interesting role in us all.
It is our entertainment system.
It is our communications device.
It's always with us
to the extent that it would be our key to our front door.
It would be infrared, enabled our front door
just as hotel doors are.
We'll have some element of technology within it.
We will embed our thumbprint or some eyeprint factor
into the usage of that technology to keep it secure.
If it is secure, we will totally depend on this one device.
We may totally depend on it to the extent
that we would like to embed it in our bodies
so that we never lose it.
Without it, we may become totally lost.
This is one of the theories of networking
that we have today is that
if your data is available somewhere,
you're connected.
If you keep all your data to yourself,
like we may do in our household PC,
someday it will fail.
And we're not very good at backing it up.
So, we need to be aware that the vitality
or the essential essence of our data is us.
As we put more and more information
into these devices, we're gonna feel more and more lost
if we lose them.
Now, that may result in us saying,
"I don't ever want me to be separated
"from that technology."
At which stage we may choose to embed it
in our bodies.
Which lead us to a couple of other technologies
that i'd like to talk about.
One of which is the man-machine interface.
I mean, today we've moved from a keyboard
to a mouse to a little pointer
that we may have in the middle of our laptop.
We've started to think about new ways.
We tried voice recognition,
which is getting better and better.
But we need that instant interaction
with the computing power that we carry with us.
People today are looking at mind interfaces.
There are two or three things going on
that I believe will lead us, eventually,
to mind control over that device.
Which may ultimately mean that we choose
to embed that technology in our brains.
Now, there are things that we have to overcome
from a health perspective.
It's never a good thing to embed anything
in our bodies that's foreign.
Also, if we are wirelessly connecting ourselves
to these devices, I think the jury's still out
on whether those wireless waves
that are coming in and using our cell phones today
are actually damaging us in some way.
But let's talk about those technologies
that I believe will drastically change the way
we interface with technology.
The first of which was sponsored
by the U. S. Department of Defense.
That, in itself, is a bit worrying.
But we'll push that to one side.
It started off by U. S. pilots being asked
to move a dot across the screen
whilst they wore a helmet configured
with electrodes.
They were asked to think about a list of subjects.
One of them might have been a waterfall.
One of them might have been going to sleep.
One of them might have been driving a car.
What they did is, they noticed
what the brainwaves did as they thought
about these things.
Then they noticed that
where they could pick-up a strong brain wave
in a particular area of the brain,
they said, "OK, let's allow the cursor
"to move from the left to the right.
"Or, go in a rightwards direction,
"a leftwards, upwards, downwards on the screen,
"when we see these traits."
In this way, the pilots gradually learned
by doing this for two hours a day
for 30 days, they could move the cursor
across the screen.
Of course, in the end, they didn't need to think
about anything but moving the cursor
because the brain was clever enough
to work out what it needed to do
to move the pointer.
Now, the good news is that
that had a practical application.
What we started to see was a couple
of companies get funding from the U.S. Department of Defense
to study this.
There was a company called, Cyberkinetics,
who came up with a product called, Brain Gate.
There's a young man by the name of Mr. Crane
who was involved in a tragic stabbing through his neck.
He became a C-4 paraplegic.
He was chomping at the bit to do something useful
with his life and volunteered to be one
of the first guinea pigs.
The FDA allowed five people
to become human guinea pigs.
What they have done is
they have performed an operation
and put a chip inside his cortex,
which can read neurons firing.
Now, they put this in the area of the brain
that controls your hands
and your movement in your arms.
They knew where that was.
He has wires that come out of his brain.
Then they connect and it's connected
to a large computer.
This device is able, in theory,
to allow him to think about
how he used to move his hands.
Then it starts to move the cursor
from left to right, up and down.
The great aspect of this,
if it can be made to work is,
if he can fire those neurons correctly still,
could we wirelessly connect all
of his muscles groups together
and allow him to move again?
Now, that's the ultimate goal
and we're some way off it.
But right now, this individual has sat
in front of a computer screen,
can move a cursor and actually, in effect, do
what we would do, which is double-click.
He can read his own Email on a computer.
He can navigate across the computer screen.
That's a great use of this technology.
Another company in France doing similar work
has got a helmet, rather than embedding the chip.
Reads the brain waves and will allow a paraplegic
to mobilize his wheelchair.
When they used to us a blow tube, a blow-suck
to control movement, he is now free of that.
He can think his way around his house.
Now, those are great uses of that technology.
But what we're really doing, is we're teaching our mind
to interface to a machine.
Now the other aspect that I want to now touch on is,
can we get the machine to interface to the mind?
We've done this twice now.
You may have heard of people who've been partially deaf.
We have implanted a chip on the brain side
that actually is firing electrical cells,
or producing electricity based on the sound
which is coming from the inner ear.
What people who have been profoundly deaf
for a number of years have found,
it's confusing for a while, then the brain makes sense.
In the end, those that have heard before,
are saying, "I can now make out voices
"and I can understand what they're saying.
"It doesn't sound like it used to sound."
However, it's actually audible speech
that they can understand.
Great move forwards.
But the brain learned how to read those signals.
We're also beginning to do that with the optic nerve,
putting photo-electric cells at the back of the eye.
With that technology, again, people are beginning
to see a matrix of light, who've had these chips embedded
in their eyes.
Over time, they anticipate that they can start
to see light and dark.
Not too many colors, but then they're beginning
to see shapes.
The brain is learning to intercept
and actually get hold of that image and apply it
in a way that the human brain can understand it.
Now, those two examples, coupled with the example
of us giving information back out to a machine,
may lead us to the two-way interface.
I find that incredibly interesting.
If we could really learn the way that the brain works,
could we be receiving information on-demand?
It's like can we do the Google search
from our mind and bring in the data,
sort it quickly enough to be able
to access all the information
that Google can possible index for us
and have it readily available to us.
It's an interesting concept.
It is an interesting concept.
And these are incredible and miraculous break-throughs.
One of our other guests, Doctor Michio Kaku, also says
we will be coming to a time when we can merge silicon
and carbon elements together, in essence,
and create exactly what you're talking about,
even extrapolating out a little further down the line.
One question I have is,
just to take a quick look at the other side.
Again, you said, this technology
was primarily being developed
by the Department of Defense.
Is that what you said earlier?
Did you say it was the Department of Defense?
It is.
Yeah, so now--
Let's talk about what that might mean.
The idea behind this, Regina, was
that if you could actually get mind control
over devices, the idea was
that you could send robots into battle
with people behind them.
So that they were making informed, intelligent decisions.
Because we're probably far better at saying, "friend or foe"
than a machine is today.
So that was, I think, the thinking
that the U. S. military had behind this.
The other point was, at the time,
we were still going for piloted aircraft.
Could we do something else
to control yet another weapon with our minds?
Rather than having a number of fingers and feet
working at the same time to maneuver the aircraft,
could we think, "Arm the missile.
"Fire it now."
Those are the unfortunate drivers for this technology,
but, hopefully, the practical uses may outweigh
the military benefits they originally were pursuing.
Isn't this going to be interesting
as all of these technologies develop
because so much of it has to do
with the intention of the driver slash programmer, user.
Yup.
And we're looking at that technology,
for example.
How might that be used if the wrong intention is
behind it?
Well, of course if we choose to be connected
wirelessly, 24 hours a day to a device
that replaces our PDA, by definition it knows
where we are because it has a GPS tracking mechanism.
I mean, in today's world, by carrying a cell phone,
you are actually giving away your location,
albeit it not very specifically.
But you can be put in a specific area
by the fact that every time your cell phone is on,
a machine somewhere is logging the fact
that you're closest to this tower.
Because it needs to know
that it can send you a telephone call,
to a specific location.
So, we are being tracked.
The ultimate use of that technology
from a location point of view says,
"We will know where you are all the time."
Because you will need to be in a particular cell
to interface wirelessly to whatever it is
that we want to interface with at that time.
So, where does that bring potentials
as potentially frightening even,
as the Manchurian Candidate, for example?
It does.
As we know, often films have been great predictors
of new technologies.
From the early days of Star Wars all the way
through to the present day.
But, the benefits that it may bring the individual
might outweigh the fears.
That's the great unknown.
What potential freedoms will we give up
to enjoy the ability to have an intellect
far beyond that which we have today?
To be able to know everything,
to experience things?
That gives a whole new meaning to entertainment
because will we one day be able
to read brain patterns and send brain patterns
that mean we experience our entertainment.
And the mind goes off in all sorts of ways
when you do that.
Will we experience the Super Bowl by feeling the emotions
and what the quarterback feels,
in going through that process?
And will we live it real time,
or have to be living it later?
If we can actually experience entertainment,
it brings it to a whole new level.
People may say, "That would be great."
I remember a scene from The Matrix.
And this is the unfortunate side of what we're talking about
of leading-edge technologies.
There was a scene in The Matrix with millions
of pods that were actually being tapped
for their electrical value.
They were just human beings living in virtual reality.
Somebody said to me, the unfortunate thing is,
90% of the world would probably have a better life
in virtual reality than it does in reality.
We're very privileged to live where we do
and be having conversations about leading-edge,
cutting technologies when we still haven't managed
to feed half the world.
We'll be following up this interview
with another talk with Ian in which we discuss
some of the more controversial,
many would even say disturbing,
technologies that lie ahead,
including the chip.
If you enjoyed this subject,
you'll also enjoy our interview
with Michio Kaku as well.
Until next time, thanks for watching.